---
title: "Hierarchical Deformation and Anisotropic Behavior of (α+β) Ti Alloys: A Microstructure-Informed Multiscale Constitutive Model Study"
collection: publications
category: manuscripts
permalink: /publication/2024-11-11-Journal-of-Plasticity
excerpt: 'In this study, the hierarchical deformation and anisotropic behavior of (α+β) Ti alloys are investigated using a novel microstructure-informed multiscale constitutive model. State-of-the-art crystal plasticity finite element (CPFE) models, due to their emphasis on a single length scale, are inadequate for capturing the complex hierarchical behavior of additively manufactured (AM) (α+β) titanium alloys, which are characterized by columnar grains and lamellar subgrain features at distinct length scales. To overcome this limitation, a decoupled multiscale framework was developed, integrating representative volume elements (RVEs) for both the columnar grain structure at the higher length scale and the subgrain microstructure at the lower length scale, with equal emphasis on each. The material behaviors at these scales were modeled using an anisotropic classical plasticity model and a mechanism-based CPFE model, respectively. The framework was experimentally validated for Directed Energy Deposition (DED) manufactured Ti-6Al-4V and used to investigate microscopic stress/strain fields, deformation localizations at grain and subgrain levels, and stress partitioning among neighboring grains. Insights from these studies led to the proposal of a new theory of anisotropy in AM (α+β) titanium alloys.'
date: 2024-09-01
venue: 'International Journal of Plasticity'
paperurl: 'https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijplas.2024.104163'
citation: 'Herath, C., Wijesinghe, K., Michopoulos, J.G., Arnold, S.M. and Achuthan, A., 2024. Hierarchical Deformation and Anisotropic Behavior of (α+ β) Ti Alloys: A Microstructure-Informed Multiscale Constitutive Model Study. International Journal of Plasticity, p.104163.'
---

In this study, the hierarchical deformation and anisotropic behavior of (α+β) Ti alloys are investigated using a novel microstructure-informed multiscale constitutive model. State-of-the-art crystal plasticity finite element (CPFE) models, due to their emphasis on a single length scale, are inadequate for capturing the complex hierarchical behavior of additively manufactured (AM) (α+β) titanium alloys, which are characterized by columnar grains and lamellar subgrain features at distinct length scales. To overcome this limitation, a decoupled multiscale framework was developed, integrating representative volume elements (RVEs) for both the columnar grain structure at the higher length scale and the subgrain microstructure at the lower length scale, with equal emphasis on each. The material behaviors at these scales were modeled using an anisotropic classical plasticity model and a mechanism-based CPFE model, respectively. The framework was experimentally validated for Directed Energy Deposition (DED) manufactured Ti-6Al-4V and used to investigate microscopic stress/strain fields, deformation localizations at grain and subgrain levels, and stress partitioning among neighboring grains. Insights from these studies led to the proposal of a new theory of anisotropy in AM (α+β) titanium alloys.
